Add release notes for Npgsql 9 (#370)
npgsql/doc: conceptual/Npgsql/release-notes/9.0.md

# Npgsql 9.0 Release Notes

Npgsql version 9.0 will be released together with .NET 9 and will be available on nuget. The full list of issues for this release is [available here](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/milestone/109?closed=1).

> [!NOTE]

> > We're considering to start dropping support for synchronous API (`NpgsqlConnection.Open`, `NpgsqlCommand.ExecuteNonQuery`, etc) starting with Npgsql 10.0. The current plan is to deprecate the API by throwing a runtime exception by default (with a switch to re-enable synchronous I/O) for Npgsql 10.0, while completely removing it for Npgsql 11.0. This is in line with ASP.NET Core and .NET runtime in general, which move in the direction of async I/O only (for example, `System.IO.Pipelines` doesn't have synchronous I/O). If you have any questions or want to share you experience/issues with async I/O, please feel free to post in the [issue](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5865).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We're considering to start dropping support for synchronous API (`NpgsqlConnection.Open`, `NpgsqlCommand.ExecuteNonQuery`, etc) starting with Npgsql 10.0. The current plan is to deprecate the API by throwing a runtime exception by default (with a switch to re-enable synchronous I/O) for Npgsql 10.0, while completely removing it for Npgsql 11.0. This is in line with ASP.NET Core and .NET runtime in general, which are moving in the direction of async I/O only (for example, `System.IO.Pipelines` doesn't have synchronous I/O). If you have any questions or want to share you experience/issues with async I/O, please feel free to post in the [issue](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5865).
```

## Add support for interval's infinity values via NodaTime's Period.MinValue/Period.MaxValue

PostgreSQL 17 added support for infinity values with `interval` type. In turn, Npgsql 9.0 adds native support to read and write them via NodaTime's `Period.MinValue` and `Period.MaxValue`. Note that while using this feature with previous versions of PostgreSQL, instead of infinity values you'll get the minimum and maximum values for `interval` type due to the way infinity values are implemented by PostgreSQL. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5696) issue for more info.

## Add support for cidr <-> IPNetwork mapping

> .NET 8 added a new type [IPNetwork](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.ipnetwork?view=net-8.0) which represents an IP network with an [IPAddress](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.ipaddress?view=net-8.0) containing the network prefix and an `int` defining the prefix length. This type seems to be a perfect fit for PostgreSQL's `cidr` type, which is why we added support to read and write it. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5821) issue for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 8 added a new type [IPNetwork](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.ipnetwork?view=net-8.0) which represents an IP network with an [IPAddress](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.ipaddress?view=net-8.0) containing the network prefix and an `int` defining the prefix length. This type seems to be a perfect fit for PostgreSQL's `cidr` type, which is why we added support to read and write it. The default when reading a `cidr` is still NpgsqlCidr in 9.0, though this will likely change in Npgsql 10.0. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5821) issue for more info.
```

## Add support for direct SSL

> PostgreSQL 17 added support for direct SSL. Direct SSL allows clients to skip sending SSL support request, which saves a roundtrip while opening a physical connection. This behavior is disabled by default (as it's not supported with previous versions of PostgreSQL), but you can enable it via `SslNegotiation` property in connection string or environment variable `PGSSLNEGOTIATION`. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5677) issue for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL 17 added support for direct SSL. Direct SSL allows clients to skip sending an SSL support request, which saves a roundtrip while opening a physical connection. This behavior is disabled by default (as it's not supported with previous versions of PostgreSQL), but you can enable it via `SslNegotiation` property in connection string or environment variable `PGSSLNEGOTIATION`. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5677) issue for more info.
```

## Add support to modify NegotiateAuthenticationClientOptions

Npgsql 9.0 has a new callback `NpgsqlDataSourceBuilder.NegotiateOptionsCallback` which is called while performing GSSAPI authentication (such as Kerberos). This allows users to modify [NegotiateAuthenticationClientOptions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.security.negotiateauthenticationclientoptions?view=net-8.0), for example changing `Credential` property to implement password-based Kerberos authentication. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5181) issue for more info.

### Add support for parallel in-progress transactions with logical streaming replication protocol V4

This change allows clients to handle multiple in-progress transactions in parallel instead of sequentially. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5760) issue for more info.

### Add GetFieldName method to ReplicationValue class

This change allows clients to receive the name of changed column while reading rows from replication stream. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5718) issue for more info.

## Breaking changes

### .NET Standard 2.0 (and .NET Framework) is not supported

> Starting with Npgsql 9.0 we're dropping support for .NET Standard 2.0, and in turn .NET Framework. Npgsql is a constantly evolving driver, which makes it problematic to add new features (like `NegotiateOptionsCallback` which allows to change [NegotiateAuthenticationClientOptions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.security.negotiateauthenticationclientoptions?view=net-8.0)) which use API that does not exist on older versions of .NET. This doesn't mean you can't use Npgsql with .NET Standard 2.0 as we're still commited to support Npgsql 8.0 (which does support .NET Standard 2.0) up until .NET 8 is out of support. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5296) issue for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Npgsql 9.0 drops support for .NET Standard 2.0, and in turn .NET Framework. Npgsql is a constantly evolving driver, which makes it problematic to add new features which use APIs that do not exist on older versions of .NET. This doesn't mean you can't use Npgsql with .NET Standard 2.0: we're still committed to supporting Npgsql 8.0 (which does support .NET Standard 2.0). See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5296) issue for more info.
```

### Change some PgOutputReplicationOptions properties to support logical streaming replication protocol V4

> The main changes are in `PgOutputReplicationOptions` class, where `ProtocolVersion` and `StreamingMode` properties were changed to an enum. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5760) issue for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main changes are in the `PgOutputReplicationOptions` class, where `ProtocolVersion` and `StreamingMode` properties were changed to an enum. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5760) issue for more info.
```

### Multiple ssl related callbacks on NpgsqlDataSourceBuilder are deprecated in favor of UseSslClientAuthenticationOptionsCallback

> With a new callback `UseSslClientAuthenticationOptionsCallback` users have much more control over the way Npgsql connects to PostgreSQL via `SslStream`. This makes other callbacks, like `UseUserCertificateValidationCallback` and `UseClientCertificate`, offer subpar experience, which is why we deprecate them. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5478) issue for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new `UseSslClientAuthenticationOptionsCallback` callback, users have much more control over the way Npgsql connects to PostgreSQL via `SslStream`. This makes other callbacks, like `UseUserCertificateValidationCallback` and `UseClientCertificate` less useful, which is why we're obsoleting them. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/5478) issue for more info.
```

### The default value of ConnectionLifetime property in connection string is set to 1 hour

> Previously, the default value of this property was set to 0, which made connections to last indefinitely. The old behavior was problematic because each physical connection on PostgreSQL's side has holds on certain caches, which can only grow over time. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/pull/5662) pull request for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, the default value of this property was set to 0, which made connections last indefinitely. The old behavior was problematic because each physical connection on PostgreSQL's side has holds on certain caches, which can only grow over time. See [this](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/pull/5662) pull request for more info.
```
